Gravity is a universal force that affects all parts of the Universe. It is the force that causes you to stay on earth. It is the force that causes apples to fall. And it is the force that causes the moon to fall. But what do I mean with the moon falling? And how does gravity work?

But before we can understand how the force of gravity works, we must first understand what a force is.

Forces cause objects to accelerate, and when an object is accelerating, its velocity changes. Furthermore, a force contains a magnitude and a direction. Above, the yellow arrow’s length represents the force’s magnitude. And its direction represents the force’s direction.

Gravity is a universal force between any two objects. And that is ANY two objects. That means that there is a force between me and you this very second, albeit a very weak force. Moreover, above, two objects orbit each other due to gravity. See how their gravitational forces are equal in magnitude? Think about what that means. It means that I pull on the earth as much as the earth is pulling on me.

Lastly, in 1687, Newton came up with an equation for gravity that describes the magnitude of any gravitational force. The G stands for the universal gravitational constant which is about 6.67408 × 10^-11. However, in the gif above, I used a gravitational constant of 150 to simulate gravity.

Once, Newton walked upon a falling apple and asked: “If apples fall, do the moon also fall?”. And the answer is yes, the moon is falling! And the reason for why the moon never hits the earth is because it has a velocity to the side. For if the moon did not have any velocity, it would simply fall to earth as you see in the animation above.

One question you might be having is the following, “Why is the bigger object from the animation above not moving? Do they not experience the same force?”. The reason why the bigger object does not move is simply that it is way too massive. It would require a way stronger force for us to notice any acceleration.
